could history be so stunningly wrong
that the temples built by
King Solomon and King Herod
were never on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem
Jews and Christians alike
believe without any doubt
that these temples were located
on the Temple Mount for
hundreds of years hidden away in
the temples Holy of Holies
rested the Ark of the Covenant
and so for Jews the Temple Mount
is the most holy place on earth
a billion Muslims hold this to be
the most holy place as well
believing it to be where
Muhammad ascended into Heaven
from the area of the dome of the rock
this presents a huge
problem for several faiths
that all clash at ground zero
at a place in Jerusalem that we know
as the Temple Mount
it should be no surprise that
this is the most volatile piece
of real estate where more blood
has been spilt over the last
three thousand years than
any other place on earth
many believe this will be the site
of World War Three
but what if the Temple Mount
is not the true location of
the temples will tradition
even allow a closer look
do we find anywhere in the Bible
ancient history or physical
evidence that the temples
were located somewhere else
on the other side of this wall stood
the first temple and the second temple
they were destroyed
and the third temple when the Messiah comes
will come here on the
other side of the wall
and we're told that God to reveal
present never left these stones
from the time of the temple till
now and that's what we feel
it when we come here God revealed present
this the holiest place
that we have right now
the third temple is gonna come right here
so without a doubt you believe
there's no doubt there's no doubt
although most people today are
convinced that the temples were
located on the Temple Mount
that wasn't the case sixteen
hundred years ago if I told you
in the fourth century there were
four places that rabbis were
suggesting for the temple four
different locations in the fourth century
would you believe me no I wouldn't
our tradition is that of
authhoritative tradition
wins out and we go with what we have
we don't we don't we don't do our own thing
we don't try to make our own
assumptions we have what we have
if we don't have what our parents and
rabbis gave us then we have nothing
before somebody can come along
and change what's already been
established their gonna have to be greater
than the one's who established it
challenging a long held tradition
is not easy but it's mandatory
in our quest to find the truth
having a tradition challenged
is never never never comfortable
and yet essential if we're gonna
really get at the truth and
what really happened and what
really is going to happen
you are Jew no I have no time to
lose with you okay [Laughing]
could it even be possible that
the greatest archaeological
mistake of all times has
occurred in locating
the temples of Herod and
Solomon on the Temple Mount
and if so where is the true
location of the temple today
the prophetic implications are
absolutely astounding and
the political repercussions
from it could alter the entire
complexion of the Middle East
hi my name is Bob Cornuke
and we're in Old Jerusalem
and I'm about to take you on
an expedition like you've
never been on before we're
gonna look for the lost
location of Solomon's and Herold's Temples
I believe that archaeology
has really missed this one
I think that history is
stunningly wrong saying that
the Temple Mount is the place
of where Herold's Temples and
Solomon's Temples were located
so we're gonna take out the
Bible and we're gonna use it
as a road map and as a compass to
solve this most ancient mystery
in around 957 BC
God had king Solomon build the
temple for worship sacrifice
and to house the Ark of the
Covenant this magnificent
facility stood until 586 BC
when the Babylonians destroyed it
and took the Israelites captive
in around 515 BC
Zerubbabel and other Israeli
exiles were able to return to
Jerusalem in order to rebuild
the temple on top of
the demolished first temple
this second temple wasn't
as spectacular as Solomon's
but served its purpose until
20 BC when king Herod
initiated a significant
renovation and expansion project
this is the temple that
stood in Jesus's day
where He taught on several occasions
and where He confronted the money changers
in 70 AD
four years after the Jews
rebelled against the Roman Empire
military commander Titus and the Roman Army
utterly destroyed the temple
today many Jews and Christians
are anticipating the day when
a third temple will be rebuilt as
foretold in the book of Ezekiel
tradition says it needs to be
rebuilt on the same spot where
Solomon and Herod's temple
stood will that be the Muslim
controlled Temple Mount or
is it somewhere else
this makes the search for
the temples actual location
that much more imperative
Biblical explorer Bob Cornuke
has spent the past few decades
searching for the real Mount Sinai
the Ark of the Covenant Noah's Ark
and the apostle Paul's shipwreck in Malta
his search for the location of
Solomon and Herod's temple's
really began several years ago
when he was reading Matthew 24
the Bible tells us
in Matthew 24
where Jesus is speaking
and He's speaking to His
disciples and He's walking away
from the temple
and He is looking up at
the temple and He tells
the disciples He said truly I tell you
not one stone here will be left on another
everyone will be thrown down
not one stone total annihilation
and that's what we hear from history
that the temple was totally destroyed
the hill called Zion
at Jerusalem the building there
that is to say the temple has
been utterly removed or shaken
it was so thoroughly laid even
with the ground by those that
dug it up to the foundation
that there was left nothing to
make those that came thither
believe it had ever been inhabited
but if Herod's Temple was
utterly removed how can
the Western Wall of the Temple
exist today either Jesus was
inaccurate in Matthew 24
or perhaps the Western Wall
wasn't part of the temple at all
about 63 BC
the Romans took this city
General Pompey had the
gates opened up to him
and from that point on the Romans
had control here for over three
hundred years the big question
is where did they stay
no one has ever found one
brick that they know of that's
from the Roman fortress
I believe it's because
it's been on the Temple Mount
that was the Roman fortress
that huge complex if you look
at it today it is in the same
dimensions as many Roman fortresses
so where did the Roman's stay
they stayed on the Temple Mount
locating the Roman Fort on the
Temple Mount explains how
the temple could be utterly
destroyed yet still have
remains existing to this
day the Western Wall
instead of being the
remains of Herod's Temple
may actually be a part of the Roman Fort
Eleazar Ben Yair the commander of the
Israelites taking refuge at Masada said
Jerusalem is now demolished to the
very foundations and have nothing left
but that monument of it
preserved I mean the camp of
those Romans that hath destroyed it
which still dwells upon its ruins
the traditional view places the
Roman Fort called the Tower of
Antonia at the northwest corner
of the Temple Mount this three
acre plot supposedly housed
the entire Tenth Roman Legion
but how large a legion history tells us
that a legion is approximately six thousand
soldiers with the support
personel it could reach as
high as ten thousand people
if I was in coming unto the
tenth heavy Roman legion
sent to Jerusalem to keep the peace
I would have occupied the high
ground I would have put
my soldiers
on the Temple Mount
and as I look at the little
bitty building that is called
Fort Antonia today
it's almost laughable
to believe that six thousand
soldiers and some four thousand
camp followers occupied that tiny building
would Rome the proud rulers of
Europe and the Middle East be
content to locate their fort as
an appendage to the Jewish Temple
or would they be more likely to
commandeer the entire Temple
Mount to build the regional
military headquarters again we
turn to historian Josephus
now as to the Tower of the Antonia
it might seem to be
composed of several cities
for if we go up to this Tower
of Antonia we gain the city
since we shall then be
upon the top of the hill
the only location that is on top of a hill
and is large enough to house
ten thousand soldiers and
support staff is the
thirty-six acre Temple Mount
in 333 AD the so called Bordeaux pilgrim
travel to Jerusalem and
describes what he found
I'm in a high tower about a
hundred feet high right next to
the Church of the Holy Sepulcher and it's
a fascinating place because
from this position
the Bordeaux pilgrim said that
he looked due east and all
thry could see was a long
wall of a Roman fort
when I look due east of here
all I see is the long wall of
the Temple Mount
so what I think the Bordeaux pilgrim was
describing was looking at the
Roman fort from this spot
in fact that's pretty conclusive
that's what he was looking at
was the Temple Mount complex
certainly I believe was a Roman
fortress that housed the Tenth Roman Legion
so if historical evidence
places the Roman fort on
the Temple Mount why do the
majority of people believe that
this is where the temple was
located when it was over with
and the temple was destroyed
by Titus in 70 AD
that there was just like a field
with blowing grass
you wouldn't even know that was
there and so the Jews that
were quarantined from Israel for so long
it's hard for them to determine
where the temple was so this has
been the place that everybody
settled on in fact in the
fourth century
there was many places
that people were trying to
figure out where is the temple
really located people were not sure
one important event that
promoted the idea of the Temple
Mount being the location of the
temple was the invasion of
Jerusalem by the crusaders and in 1099
there was thousands of crusaders
and they came and they conquered
this Temple Mount complex and
when they went on top of it
there was great carnage
a lot of Jews a lot of Muslims were killed
and they crawled up on the
dome wasn't gold then
but they called up on
that dome area up there
and they ripped off the crescent
moon and they replaced it
with the cross and they called
it Templum Domini which means
the temple of God
that I think started
a tradition
seventy years after the
crusaders conquered Jerusalem
and eleven hundred years after
Herod's Temple was destroyed
a Jew from Spain named Benjamin of Tudela
visited Jerusalem
and wrote that the Temple Mount
was the location of the former
temples his emphatic statements
seem to seal the tradition and
from that point on
it has been virtually
unchallenged well I believe
that this is not the place
of Solomon's Temple's
and Herold's Temples but it's
actually in the city of David a few
thousand feet south of here and
we're gonna go the city of
David right now and we're gonna try and see
if that is the true place
where God tells us these
temples were located
the city of David is a twelve
acre plot of land just south of
the Temple Mount
we're here in the city of David
and it was back in the eighteen
hundreds where they established
that this was the city of David
with the discovery of the Gihon
springs and Hezekiah's tunnel
when king David arrived in
Jerusalem the city of David was
inhabited by the Jebusites
David's men captured their
fortress
and 2 Samuel 5:9 says
so David lived in the fortress
and called it the city of David
and then the scriptures in
2 Samuel 24:18
it is revealed that David was
after he conquered the Jebusite
city which is right under the city of David
he was required by the Lord to
purchase the threshing floor from
Ornan the Jebusite
and then 2 Chronicles 3:1 we see
that Solomon it says that Solomon first
began to build the house of the Lord
by the threshing floor that
was purchased from Ornan
the Jebusite Solomon's Temple was in the
city of David the Jebusite fortress
I can't see how you can
argue with 2 Chronicles 3:1
if we're gonna take the Bible
at face value that's where
Solomon's Temple was
the city of David is also
referred to as Zion
2 Samuel 5:7 says
David captured the fortress of Zion
that is the city of David
Eusebius a third century
historian and curator of
the library in Caesarea
wrote that the temple was in Zion
the hill called Zion and Jerusalem
the building there that
is to say the temple
King David took
the Zion
to the custom
and changed
his name to the city of David
so the Mount of Zion is the city of David
so the love of his I
only the city of David
we're standing in the area
of the city of David here's
an archaeological site and
there's the south wall of
the traditional Temple Mount so we're in
the general area of the Temple Mount and
this area we have seen in
photographs in the 1930's
and we see these terrorists
farms you can even
see the people out there
killing the ground and it's
very interesting
that the Bible says this
in a prophecy the minor
prophet Micah says in 3:12
Zion shall be plowed like a field
Jerusalem shall become heaps
of ruins and the mountains of
the temple like the bare
hills of the forest
the temples gonna be like a plowed field
well there's no plowed field up
there those walls have been up
there you know a couple
thousand years if that is
really the temple Micah says there
should be a plowed field
it never was this area was
so we can be assured that
in the city of David
it matches with what the prophet says
and what the Bible says
in history you know there's not a theory
that it doesn't have a long
list of critics that line up
especially the temple theory
it's so shocking to a lot of
people they say wait a second the temple in
the city of David and
the stronghold of Zion
and then they say wait wait we
have a great verse here that
tells you that you're wrong about the
temple being in the city of David
then Solomon assembled the elders
of Israel and all the heads of
the tribes to bring up the Ark
of the Covenant of the Lord from
the city of David which is Zion
so what was brought up out of
the city of David thus it was
brought where they surmise to
the Temple Mount the Bible doesn't
say where it was taken
it was placed into the
Holy of Holies after that
underneath the wings of the cherubim
now where was it taken when it was
taken out of the city of David
there was a huge festival
where all the priest of Israel
came where they slaughtered so
many animals that they couldn't
even count them the Bible says
the city of David's just a twelve acre area
very very small confines
so they couldn't have done that
in the city did they went and had
this big festival like a state fair
is not gonna be done in city hall
and then they brought it back
into the temple which was
in the city of David
a little known historical
account describes two covered
bridges or colonnades that
spanned some six hundred feet
between Ford Antonia on the north and
Herod's Temple to the south
Josephus describes them
now as to the tower of Antonia
it was situated at the corner
of two colonies of the court of
the temple of that on the west
and that on the north
he then describes Fort Antonia
as a guard to the temple and
mentions that it is
located on a higher hill
and that it hindered this side
of the temple on the north
these descriptions confirm that
the Fort was on the higher
Temple Mount while the temple
was six hundred feet to
the south and at a lower elevation
there's a story in the book of
Acts that also confirms this
it describes the time that the
commander of the Roman soldiers
quickly deployed troops from
the fort down to the temple to
rescue the apostle Paul
from a riotous situation
at once the commander took along
some soldiers and centurions
and ran down to them
then verse forty describes
how Paul addressed the crowd
Paul standing on the stairs spoke to them
these were the stairs leading
back up to the Fortress Antonia
another clue to the location of
the temple is the Gihon springs
the fresh water source is
mentioned in the Bible in
1 kings 1:38 where Solomon
was brought to the Gihon
to anoint him as king
fresh running water is
also necessary for worship
and to perform animal sacrifices
which took place in the temple
1 kings 8:62 tells us
on the day of the temple dedication
Solomon offered a sacrifice of
fellowship offerings to the Lord
twenty two thousand cattle
and a hundred and twenty
thousand sheep and goats
cleaning up after the sacrifice
of that many animals would
require a huge amount of
running water Roman historian
Tacitus tells us the temple
contained an inexhaustible spring
you have to have running
water from a spring
to wash and purify the priest
before they go into the temple
to worship here we have clear
clean running water coming from
the Gihon springs
which travels through Hezekiah's tunnel
and comes here to this
pool of water
before the priests would go into
the temple weither it be Solomon's
Temple or Herold's Temple they
needed to be bathed in spring
water the only spring water in all
of Jerusalem is right here in
the Gihon springs
there's absolutely no spring
water on theTemple of the Mount
there's no way that they would have
washed themselves in the Gihon
springs and then walked a quarter
mile to a half a mile to
the Temple Mount
before they were allowed to
go into the temple precincts
considered to be purified
tradition when valued
higher than evidence can be
a stumbling block to finding the truth
but tradition can also
provide valuable clues
when accompanied by scriptural
historical or physical evidence
so local traditions need to be
considered in our search for
the temple location I've been
it's a tour guide here for more
than thirteen years and there's
some amazing things that we're
discovering now that is
that are to the south
of the Temple Mount area
where we believe we've found
the Temple of Solomon which is
gonna be to the southern part
and Solomon's Temple
is possibly really in this area
close to the city of David
we know from all my life
that the temple it's in this
area nobody say that the temple
it's under the mosque nobody
say that the temple here in the
corner and nobody say that
they've
temple here but all the
people who understand
in these things they say that
the temple it's under the city of
David this is the city of David
the city of David okay
they say the Jewish say
some of the Jews say that
the temple its been here right on the
Temple Mount yes on the Temple Mount
there is another people from Jewish
they say the temple it's
in the mosque under the mosque so from my
opinion from my what I see over here
most of the people say that it's
under the city of David
so you're saying that the Bible is telling
you an archaeologist is telling you
the Bible say this is the place the
city of David the city of David
the Bible say
yeah the Bible say that this but
like if I speak nobody will hear
another people nobody will hear
but it's is something politic
beyond politics and tradition
is there any archaeological
data to support the idea of the
temple being in the city of
David a couple years ago I was
going on a tour of the city of
David which is an underground
labyrinth of tunnels and caves
a lot of these stones are believed
to be from the time of Abraham
the Jebusite Fortress and things
mentioned in the Bible but as
I'm walking along I saw this
flicker of light way up in
a shaft where men were working
I heard metal on metal
and I saw the flicker of light
and up inside where they were
working I found out later on
was a place that we
believe could be part of
Solomon's Temple
and we're gonna be going there
but it all started for me
right up there
through that shaft where I
saw that light two years ago
this area was excavated recently
by Eli Shukron who was this
director of archaeology in
the city of David I think
he stumbled across
an area that was within
part of the structure of Solomon's Temple
this is from the first temple
period even be before that
we're going to back to the middle Bronze
period and that is before King David
eight hundred years before king
David would place this around
the time of Abraham and Melchizedek
we use this place as a worship
area and then still use it
till the end of this area it's like
the end of the eighth century
beginning seventh century BC
and this is the only place that
we know in the city of David
that we can say here it was some
worship with standing stone
with the which was for
sacrifice all what we have around you
and this is a place for worship
this is a place for praying
this is place for a sacrifice
and this is a place
people connect with their God
we're here in this incredible
archaeological site right below
my feet here
is an olive press
you can see where the
the wood beam went in here
and they ground the olives
olives are very important for anointing
someone going into the temple
right close by within thirty feet
we have the Gihon springs
and you needed that rushing water to anoint
the priest before they went into the
temple we also read in scripture
where Solomon was brought down by a mule
to the Gihon Springs right here
and he was anointed with the oil
when he was a crowned king at the Gihon
Springs which is right where we are
and amazingly archaeologists
have recently uncovered this
area that is dated to
the first temple period
and it has within it channels
if you look here this is a
channel where the blood ran
the blood ran here
they would kill the animals and
then blood would go through here
we could see where the animals
were actually tied up
this is where
the rings went through
and this tethered the animal
when archaeologists came here
they found just piles of bones
all through here evidence of
animal sacrifices and they
found these unique grooves
in the ground
and these are believed to be Eli Shukron
told me the archaeologists
here that these were stands
like wooden stands or metal stands
so this area here going
well over there in here
is an old ancient
sanctuary which I believe
is a part of Solomon's Temple itself
you got the blood channel you got the
olive press right there
you've got little hooks
stone hocks in the side of
the wall where you could tie
off animals and it's probably
ten yards from the Gihon
Springs a perfect place
to have water
because if your doing a lot of sacrifices
you need water for that
is this Solomon's Temple
I don't know is it Herod's
Temple I don't know but
according to a top Israeli archaeologist
it is a temple and he is not
ready to say it was the Temple
of Solomon or the Temple of Herold
but he said it was a temple
and it's in the same place
that 2 Chronicles 3:1
says Solomon
set up or built the temple to
the Lord it's in the city of
David right near the Gihon Springs
could it be that this ancient
sanctuary is what remains of
Solomon's temple Herod's Temple
which was built above Solomon's
was completely destroyed in 70 AD
but these remains covered over
by the Babylonians in 586 BC
fit perfectly with 2 Chronicles
3:1 this stuff is blowing
my mind we think
that these rocks around us
are telling us that this is
the exact place of Solomon's Temple
and everything is pointing
to this place and no other
it's not on the Temple Mount
it's in the city of David
by the Gihon Springs
which is a gurgling just a few feet away
from my standing right now
well I think one of the things
we need to tread carefully
because it's so emotional we
need to realize we're dealing
with deeply held beliefs
so we need to do that
with some compassion on the one hand
but at the same time I see
it as a healthy thing
because it should draw us in the direction
of re-examining our scholarship
there are certain places
where your big challenge
isn't finding new evidence per
se the biggest challenge is to
set aside your presuppositions
so they don't
get in the way of discovery I think that
the position of the temple being in
the city of David has merit of course
it raises all kinds of other
questions the fact that
the scriptures say
that the temple was in the city of David
and it had to be near the Gihon Spring
and I look at the Temple Mount
and there's no spring up on
the Temple Mount so I have become
a firm believer in the fact
that the temple was not
up on the Temple Mount
I'm convinced it was right
there in the city of David
if indeed the temple was
located in the city of David
what implication does it have for today
obviously a lot of Christians
are saying well if the temples
ever gonna be rebuilt
it's got to be rebuilt right
where the dome of the rock is
wow
that's not gonna set of
World War Three is it
but if if the real temple
was in the city of David
which is to the south
of where the dome of the rock
is significantly to the south
outside the current city walls of the city
then the temple can be rebuilt
in the city of David and not
touch the dome of the rock that has
incredible political
implications quite obviously
in Luke 8:17 there is a fascinating verse
for nothing is hidden that will
not be revealed and nothing
concealed that will not be
made known and come to light
could it be that the temple is one
of those things that it's hidden
that will be revealed that is
concealed that will come to light
if we're ever gonna to find the
temple I think we need to use
the Bible and the Bible is telling me
that the temple has to
be in the city of David
in the stronghold of Zion
and the luring poll of oral
traditions needs to be ignored
that's where we'll find
truth is in the word of God
and not what man is guessing
but what God is telling us